The process of rare disease identification by clinical geneticists is closely associated with the ability to correlate the phenotype of a patient with the relevant genetic syndromes. In order to perform this correlation, the phenotype has to be described in a canonical form or language. Phenotypes such as this are hard to define in a robust manner. In order to build such a system, we decided to focus on facial analysis in our journey to create a leading AI solution using next generation phenotyping (NGP). With facial recognition one can take as many facial images as needed per person. When aggregating knowledge from clinicians, we noticed that there is an internal bias of ethnicity that is closely associated with certain syndromes, some more than others.  As we maintain the highest privacy and security standards, developers are unable to access user data. Tailoring a solution that combines the components of genomics and AI-based phenotyping is not an easy task and it depends on the ability of stakeholders from many disciplines to work together, share data, and collaborate on research and development. One valuable approach for improving medical care for rare disease patients are initiatives and networks that aim to bundle data and expertise about rare diseases so that healthcare providers can easily access and exchange relevant information.  We opted to perform a scoping review because this type of review is best suited to map research activity in a broad and heterogeneous field such as machine learning and rare diseases. To identify scientific articles that apply machine learning in the field of rare diseases, we systematically searched the literature on PubMed. Study selection and data extraction were performed by the first author (JuS). Human error hinders accurate diagnostics, as interpreting medical information is a complex and cognitively challenging task. The entire diagnostic process, in general, is a sophisticated and patient-centered, collaborative activity that involves information gathering and clinical reasoning with the goal of determining a patient’s health problem. The working diagnosis and an explanation of it are shared with the patient, and appropriate treatment is planned. This highly complex process has, on the one hand, great potential for errors and, on the other hand, may vary according to the medical discipline. Furthermore, the amount of medical data is continuously growing, and systems are now capable of identifying, extracting, and processing information from different sources more quickly than previously. The solution is adjusted to accurately detect pathology in images, also to identify normal healthy screens.  The solution is adjusted to accurately detect pathology in images, also to identify normal healthy screens. By sifting out healthy patients, the system allows healthcare providers to eliminate up to 90% of related triage costs. The objective of this research lies in identifying in which areas of the diagnostic process AI has already been applied and how these approaches are to be evaluated. We focused on papers that specifically considered and applied AI in the context of diagnostics. Nevertheless, these studies are rather the exception; most approaches have developed a specific algorithm to diagnose a particular disease. The increasing number of studies is a product of the enhanced and ever-growing technical capabilities and the quantity of medical data. A key difference is that algorithms need a lot of concrete examples – many thousands – in order to learn. Since there is plenty of good data available in these cases, algorithms are becoming just as good at diagnostics as the experts. Instead, AI systems will be used to highlight potentially malignant lesions or dangerous cardiac patterns for the expert – allowing the doctor to focus on the interpretation of those signals. Images are one of the types of data that AI, namely deep learning, is more fruitful at analyzing; hence, imaging is crucial in phenotyping, diagnosis, and even the identification of new RDs. The authors use transfer learning to translate the general face recognition learning trained on a large scale dataset to the rare genetic syndromes domain. The unraveling of underlying affected genetic and molecular players and pathways is crucial for disease comprehension and therapeutic target selection. Biomedical robots are sets of algorithms or classifiers that can analyze data, create new knowledge, and even act as medical DSS. The lack of data, complexity and heterogeneity within and among RDs, and overlapping and infrequent clinical manifestations challenge correct disease classification.  AI presents as a potential game-changer in this field, backed up by the encouraging results obtained in treatment discovery in common disorders. The use of AI algorithms in diagnosis (e.g., analysis and classification of sequence pathogenic variants) and drug discovery and preclinical research (e.g., new molecules designing, animal testing reduction, drug interaction) are just some of the examples of the benefits AI has brought to biomedicine. In supervised learning, the data are labeled, that is, the algorithm is given the input data along with the corresponding target data. The ability of AI technologies to integrate and analyze data from different sources (e.g., multi-omics, patient registries, and so on) can be used to overcome Rare diseases challenges. The AI technology has been applied to various aspects of cataract, both on clinical and surgical management, from diagnosing cataracts to optimizing the biometry for intraocular lens (IOL) power calculation.Automation derived from AI application could not only improve screening and objective assessment but also cause less stress and pain for infants undergoing examination compared with indirect ophthalmoscopy. Furthermore, some studies on AI have focused on pediatric ophthalmology, with the aim of helping clinicians in overcoming common practical limitations due to pediatric patients' compliance. External validation of algorithms represents the second challenge. Some solutions to recognize potential biases and limit unwanted outcomes could be to rebalance the training dataset if a certain subgroup is underrepresented or to select a training dataset with diverse patient populations. AI could speed up some processes, reduce the workload for clinicians, and minimize diagnostic errors due to inappropriate data integration. Support vector machine was also applied in cancer diagnosis. With the help of machine learning process, structured data like genetic data, electro physical data, and imaging data are properly investigated. Correspondingly, a device that is wearable was proposed for gathering data for regular and pathological steps for calculation of stroke. Several studies have attempted to concern machine learning techniques to neuro-imaging data to support with stroke analysis. To enhance and maintain the medical assessment making procedure, a model was proposed for expecting a three-month healing outcome by examining the physiological considerations for the duration of 48 hours following stroke with logistic degeneration. A database was observed with 107 patient’s medical information through acute anterior stroke and also posterior stroke via intra-arterial therapy. A database was observed with 107 patient’s medical information through acute anterior stroke and also posterior stroke via intra-arterial therapy. Collecting information data from patient discussions and checks. For instance, technology application has improved in all regions of daily life. Although there is wisdom of excessive prospective in the use of artificial intelligence in modern medicine, there are also worries about the defeat of the ‘human touch’ in such an important and person-motivated work. Smart biomedical and medical packaging with the application of polymers is a generally and rapidly growing area of interest for academia and industries. The complicated algorithm requires to be taught during the healthcare results previous to the system which can support the physicians for the disease analysis and plans which should be required for treatment. This has produced remarkable enthusiasm in several fields of healthcare science, as well as drug analysis and public health. The transfer of analog input into digital output is an oppressive task and may result in a defeat of important information, which would have been cooperative to the consumer. In an objective evaluation in which researchers were given slides of lymph node cells and asked to determine whether or not they contained cancer, the team’s automated diagnostic method proved accurate approximately 92 percent of the time.  As technology evolves, Artificial Intelligence also able to change the decision of Surgeons and Physicians. Huge clinical evaluation is essential for ensuring the efficiency, accuracy and safety of Artificial Intelligence. Using artificial intelligence in healthcare, the most widespread utilization of traditional machine learning is precision medicine. Diagnosis and treatment of disease has been at the core of artificial intelligence AI in healthcare for the last 50 years.  Integration issues have been a greater barrier to widespread adoption of AI in healthcare when compared to the accuracy of suggestions. Being able to predict what treatment procedures are likely to be successful with patients based on their make-up and the treatment framework is a huge leap forward for many healthcare organizations. The use of artificial intelligence in healthcare has the potential to assist healthcare providers in many aspects of patient care and administrative processes.  In regards to diseases, cancer, cardiovascular, and nervous system disorders are the most frequently researched involving ML tools. To perform well, self-trained systems should interact constantly with the clinical studies data, so it’s obvious that human activity is interconnected with machine learning. Medical imaging gives visual representations of organs and tissues on the cell level, which contributes greatly to prognostication and disease identifying. Drug discovering and manufacturing process strives to be low-cost, effective, not harmful, and with a low risk of side effects. Disease prediction is all about the social impact of medicine and quality of life improvements. Recent advances — such as secure data storage or drug trials, disease recognition, or smart patients’ records in machine learning applications — help to expand the network of undiagnosed diseases network. Our specialists do pay enough attention to maintain and preserve public trust in technology. Both input data (time series of the symptoms) and output (figures representing the probability of future events or their time interval) should be aligned with the ethical basics with respect to human anatomy. Both input data (time series of the symptoms) and output (figures representing the probability of future events or their time interval) should be aligned with the ethical basics with respect to human anatomy. Disease identification and diagnosis becomes more precise due to automated scanning processes performed by trained machine learning models. Among the other top trends, machine learning in healthcare as an effective solution was singled out. The future of standard medical practice might be here sooner than anticipated, where a patient could see a computer before seeing a doctor. Because even though these algorithms can meaningfully impact medicine and bolster the power of medical interventions, there are numerous regulatory concerns that need addressing first. Advances in computational power paired with massive amounts of data generated in healthcare systems make many clinical problems ripe for AI applications. Recently, other imaging-based algorithms showed a similar ability to increase physician accuracy.  Clarified guidelines from the FDA, however, could help specify requirements for algorithms and could result in an uptick of clinically deployed algorithms. Understandably, researchers, companies, and entrepreneurs might be hesitant to expose their proprietary methods to the public, at the risk of losing money by getting their ideas taken and strengthened by others. Either way, increasing transparency in the short term is necessary so that patient data is not mishandled or improperly classified, and so it could be easier to determine whether an algorithm will be sufficiently accurate in the clinic. We need to rapidly and transparently collect and curate such data globally to make it available to the research community. The community can help find the best and most precise treatment schemes to serve individual patients and develop techniques to accelerate the development of novel and innovative treatments. ML models can now recognize people and objects in images; understand, translate and generate spoken language; and identify subtle relationships in biological data. The research and results of these tests are still being gathered, and the overall standards for the use AI in medicine are still being defined.  Machine learning models could be used to observe the vital signs of patients receiving critical care and alert clinicians if certain risk factors increase. A lot of time is spent during clinical trials assigning medical codes to patient outcomes and updating the relevant datasets. For example, if a clinical note includes a list of a patient's current medications along with a new medication their provider recommends, a well-trained AI algorithm can use natural language processing to identify which medications belong in the patient's medical history. Over the past few years, life sciences companies have made commendable advancements in the realm of rare diseases, but the dominance of the associated challenges still exists. Patient-level data is available in abundance today, arriving in both structured and unstructured formats. Also, by ensuring a continuous feedback loop mechanism,  ML algorithms will help make these indicators more accurate over time. When alerted, patients and physicians will be able to work together to remove all possibilities of disease morbidity and take the necessary steps to improve patient outcomes. With this, the trifecta of data, technology, and people, promises to break bigger healthcare barriers, as it has in the past.---With this, the trifecta of data, technology, and people, promises to break bigger healthcare barriers, as it has in the past. AI applications can provide personalized medicine and X-ray readings. The potential in health is profound, given the growing volume of electronic data as well as the inherent complexity of the sector, its reliance on information to solve problems, and the variability and complexity of how disease interacts with individuals and populations.There is no indication that machines will replace humans who work in health, but AI will almost definitely result in human tasks changing greatly. This includes balancing the prospective benefits and risks of private sector AI initiatives in health, where profit motives may clash with the public interest. Users report their symptoms into the app, which uses speech recognition to compare against a database of illnesses. Most common users could be people with serious medical conditions, patients who tend to go against doctor advice, and participants in clinical trials. Body scans can spot cancer and vascular diseases early and predict the health issues people might face based on their genetics. Since the first step in health care is compiling and analyzing information (like medical records and other past history), data management is the most widely used application of digital automation. Concurrent developments in medical imaging relate to AI tools  that are intended to improve patient and clinician safety, and  patient experience.



